Add faqs- first draft (#17)
worldbank/wb-reproducible-research-repository: reproducibility_FAQs.md

  Reproducibility requires that the same inputs always produce the same outputs. If tables or figures change between runs, the code is unstable. This often happens due to unsorted merges, random processes without a set seed, or non-unique identifiers used for sorting. Instability makes it impossible to confidently verify findings.

- **Starts from Intermediate Data:**  
  The package should begin with the original/raw data (i.e. documented). If it starts from partially processed or undocumented intermediate datasets, it becomes unclear how those datasets were constructed, preventing full reproducibility. 

- **Manual Steps Not Documented:**  
  If figures or tables are modified manually (e.g., in Excel) without clear instructions or supporting code, the process becomes opaque. All steps used to generate results—even if manual—must be documented clearly in the README or equivalent instructions.

- **Coding Errors:**  
  Broken scripts, incorrect file paths, missing dependencies, or syntax errors can prevent the code from running altogether. Ensure to run the code once before submitting the package.

- *Incomplete Version Control or Environment Info:**  

>   Failing to specify software versions (e.g., using Stata 18 but not declaring it), or not locking Python/R environments (e.g., with `requirements.txt`, `renv.lock`) can cause code to behave differently on other systems. Reproducibility requires knowing exactly what software environment was used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Failing to specify software versions (e.g., using Stata 18 but not declaring it), or not locking Python/R environments (e.g., with `requirements.txt`, `renv.lock`) can cause code to behave differently on other systems. Reproducibility requires knowing exactly what software environment was used. [This presentation](https://osf.io/q7rjt) contains more information on this issue and potential solutions.
```

If your package includes Excel files:

-   **Avoid manual steps**  (e.g., copy-pasting, deleting rows)
-   **Use formulas and macros**  where appropriate
-   **Document all transformations clearly**  — either in a separate log file or within the README
-   **Explain how outputs were created from Excel files**, especially if they appear in the manuscript
    

 [See our Excel guidelines](https://worldbank.github.io/wb-reproducible-research-repository/resources/excel/Excel_Guidelines.html)  for recommended practices.

## Data-Related Questions

### What is original data?
Original data refers to a citable dataset—one that is documented, publicly accessible or archived in a World Bank internal catalog—and serves as the starting point for reproducibility.  A few options include:
-   Unmodified raw data: As originally received, from surveys, administrative systems, or fieldwork, with no changes beyond the removal of personally identifiable information(PII).  
-   Published datasets: Datasets from trusted sources like the Microdata Library, LSMS, DHS, etc.  

> -   Official statistics & indicators: Data from sources like the World Development Indicators, national statistics portals, or IMF/WEO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Official statistics & indicators: Data from sources like the World Development Indicators, national statistics portals, or IMF/WEO
-   Data as it was received from another WB team or an external counterpart, except for the removal of personally identifiable information.
```

    -   The reproducibility team may request temporary access directly from the data provider.
    -   If needed, we can sign a non-disclosure agreement (NDA) to access the data solely for verification purposes.        
-   **Virtual verification**
    -   The author runs the full package in a prepared environment (e.g., via screen sharing or secure remote session).
    -   The reviewer observes the process and receives the resulting outputs for comparison.
-   **Synthetic data approach**
    -   Authors share synthetic datasets that mimic the structure of the real data.
    -   The reviewer verifies reproducibility using the actual data, while the public package includes only the synthetic version.
    
These approaches help ensure transparency and reproducibility without compromising data confidentiality.

### How do I document the datasets used in the reproducibility package?

All datasets used in the package must be documented in the **Data Availability Statement**. This should include the following information based on the source of the data:

#### 🔹 If using data generated by others:
- Provide a full data citation or DOI, or include:

>   - **Filename**: Exact file name from the source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Filename(s)**: Exact file name(s) from the source
```

  - **Source**: Name of the data provider or institution
  - **URL**: Direct download link, if available
  - **Access Date**: Month and year when the data was downloaded
- If known, include:
  - **License**: Who can access the data? Can it be redistributed?
- If using a subset of the data (e.g., via point-and-click download):
  - Specify details like time period, units, or variable names extracted (e.g., from WDI)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If using data manually constructed or collected programmatically (i.e.: using web scraping) from a source on the internet or a report:
  - Specify the instructions on how the data was collected and where it comes from
  - Include all other information mentioned above

```

﻿## Frequently Asked Questions: Reproducibility Packages

Before diving into the FAQs, we recommend reviewing the [Guidance Note](https://github.com/worldbank/wb-reproducible-research-repository/blob/main/guidance_note_wb.md) for a comprehensive overview of reproducibility standards and submission expectations.

**Note for World Bank Staff:** For internal FAQs tailored to World Bank researchers—please visit the [internal reproducibility resources page](https://worldbankgroup.sharepoint.com/sites/WBPRWP/SitePages/PublishingPages/FAQs-10262018-142102.aspx).

## Table of Contents

- [General FAQs](#general-faqs)

>   - [How do I submit a package?](#how-do-i-submit-a-package)

Reviewer 2: add who can submit a package [WB staff and consultants only]

  - [How long does the reproducibility verification process take?](#how-long-does-the-reproducibility-verification-process-take)
  - [How should I organize my package?](#how-should-i-organize-my-package)
  - [What does the reproducibility report contain?](#what-does-the-reproducibility-report-contain)
  - [What are the most common reasons reproducibility checks fail?](#what-are-the-most-common-reasons-reproducibility-checks-fail)
  - [What if my package uses Excel?](#what-if-my-package-uses-excel)

- [Data-Related Questions](#data-related-questions)

>   - [What is original data?](#what-is-original-data)

Reviewer 2: @ankritisingh this is perhaps a broader conversation but i've been using 'source data' recently as that seems to be better understood. and it's clearer to then explain that all data sources used for the analysis need to be fully documented. perhaps the FAQ here is something more like: what is the starting point for the reproducibility package? rep packages should start from documented data sources...

  - [Do you check if the code is correct?](#do-you-check-if-the-code-is-correct)

- [Documentation-Related Questions](#documentation-related-questions)
  - [What is a README and what should it include?](#what-is-a-readme-and-what-should-it-include)
  - [What is a Data Availability Statement?](#what-is-a-data-availability-statement)

## General FAQs

### How do I submit a package?
Authors can request a reproducibility verification through [this submission form](https://survey.wb.surveycto.com/collect/prwp_reproducibility?caseid=).    The package must include all components listed in this [checklist](https://github.com/worldbank/wb-reproducible-research-repository/blob/main/reproducibility_package_checklist.md).

### How long does the reproducibility verification process take?

Most packages are reviewed within 2 weeks when only minor or no corrections are needed. The total time depends on the complexity of the analysis and the completeness of the submission. Packages requiring substantial clarification or additional information from authors may take longer.

### How should I organize my package?

> It is  recommended to organize your reproducibility package using a clear and consistent folder structure.  A standard structure includes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is  recommended to organize your reproducibility package using a clear and consistent folder structure.  The recommended structure includes:
```

> -   `Data/`:    Include only  **original input data**  as described in the README. Do  not  include intermediate or processed files.

Reviewer 2: we sometimes do want intermediate data though right? if we can't run the source data directly?

> -   `Code/`:  All scripts required to take the original data to final outputs. Organize by task (e.g.,  `cleaning/`,  `analysis/`) if needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   `Code/`:  All scripts required to take the original data to final outputs. Organizing scripts by task (e.g.,  `cleaning/`,  `analysis/`) is recommended.
```

        
    -   Include the  **README**  and  **Data Availability Statement**  (can be part of the README).
        
    -   Add the  **final manuscript**  or a link to it.

        
### What does the reproducibility report contain?

- **Certification** that the package is functional, stable, and reproduces the paper’s results exactly  
- **Technical environment details** including operating system, processor, memory, and software version used during verification  
- **Exhibit-by-exhibit status** noting whether each table or figure in the paper was successfully reproduced

### What are the most common reasons reproducibility checks fail?

Even well-documented research packages can fail reproducibility checks. Below are the most frequent issues we encounter:

- **Unstable Code (Results change with every run):**  
  Reproducibility requires that the same inputs always produce the same outputs. If tables or figures change between runs, the code is unstable. This often happens due to unsorted merges, random processes without a set seed, or non-unique identifiers used for sorting. Instability makes it impossible to confidently verify findings.

>   Most reproducibility issues are solved after setting a random seed in the beginning of the code. Some other issues can occur in Stata, which are explained in [this presentation](https://osf.io/2bxn7).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Most instability issues are solved after setting a random seed in the beginning of the code. Some other issues can occur in Stata, which are explained in [this presentation](https://osf.io/2bxn7).
```

- **Starts from Intermediate Data:**  
  The package should begin with the original/raw data (see the question below on what is original data for more information). If it starts from partially processed or undocumented intermediate datasets, it becomes unclear how those datasets were constructed, preventing full reproducibility. 

- **Manual Steps Not Documented:**  

>   If figures or tables are modified manually (e.g., in Excel) without clear instructions or supporting code, the process becomes opaque. All steps used to generate results—even if manual—must be documented clearly in the README or equivalent instructions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If figures or tables are modified manually (e.g., in Excel) without clear instructions or supporting code, the process is difficult for third parties to follow. All steps used to generate results—even if manual—must be documented clearly in the README or equivalent instructions.
```

- **Coding Errors:**  

>   Broken scripts, incorrect file paths, missing dependencies, or syntax errors can prevent the code from running altogether. Ensure to run the code once before submitting the package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Broken scripts, incorrect file paths, missing dependencies, or syntax errors can prevent the code from running altogether. Ensure to run the code once before submitting the package.
```
```suggestion
  Broken scripts, incorrect file paths, missing dependencies, or syntax errors can prevent the code from running altogether. Ensure the exact package you are submitting runs through without errors before you submit it. Best practice is to have another research team member (not the primary code author) run the package as well (for example, this helps catch hard-coded filepaths). 
```

- *Incomplete Version Control or Environment Info:**  

>   Failing to specify software versions (e.g., using Stata 18 but not declaring it), or not locking Python/R environments (e.g., with `requirements.txt`, `renv.lock`) can cause code to behave differently on other systems. Reproducibility requires knowing exactly what software environment was used. [This presentation](https://osf.io/q7rjt) contains more information on this issue and potential solutions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Failing to specify software versions (e.g., using Stata 18 but only declaring Stata), or not locking Python/R environments (e.g., with `requirements.txt`, `renv.lock`) can cause code to behave differently on other systems. Reproducibility requires knowing exactly what software environment was used. [This presentation](https://osf.io/q7rjt) contains more information on this issue and potential solutions.
```

- **Manuscript Version Not Aligned with Code:**  
  In some cases, the code is up to date but the manuscript is not. Or vice versa—the manuscript reflects newer analyses, but the package reflects an older draft. This creates discrepancies between exhibits and outputs. Always ensure that the final manuscript matches the results generated by the package.

### What if my package uses Excel?

> While Excel is widely used, reproducibility verification is  **much more difficult**  when workflows rely on manual steps, hidden formulas, or undocumented edits. Therefore,  **we strongly discourage using Excel for critical parts of the analysis**  and recommend automating as much of the workflow as possible.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure the bold is warranted here ... yes, excel is a problem, but singling it out for bold feels a little much (i feel as strongly about version control problems!). the language is fine, but i recommend removing (or at least reducing) the bold.

-   **Explain how outputs were created from Excel files**, especially if they appear in the manuscript
    

 [See our Excel guidelines](https://worldbank.github.io/wb-reproducible-research-repository/resources/excel/Excel_Guidelines.html)  for recommended practices and our [presentation on how to produce tables and plots in Stata and R](https://osf.io/ezmsb) for quick instructions on how to build reproducible outputs.

## Data-Related Questions

### What is original data?
Original data refers to a citable dataset—one that is documented, publicly accessible or archived in a World Bank internal catalog—and serves as the starting point for reproducibility.  A few options include:
-   Unmodified raw data: As originally received, from surveys, administrative systems, or fieldwork, with no changes beyond the removal of personally identifiable information(PII).  
-   Published datasets: Datasets from trusted sources like the Microdata Library, LSMS, DHS, etc.  
-   Official statistics & indicators: Data from sources like the World Development Indicators, national statistics portals, or IMF/WEO

> -   Data as it was received from another WB team or an external counterpart, except for the removal of personally identifiable information (see the question below on documenting the data sources for more information).

Reviewer 2: I'm not clear on this example: this data would need to be documented in MDL or DDH no?

> ### Can you do a reproducibility verification if the research relies on confidential data?

Reviewer 2: adapt references to confidential to be proprietary or confidential throughout (meanings overlap but people use both so let's be inclusive)

-   **Data access for verification only**
    -   The reproducibility team may request temporary access directly from the data provider.
    -   If needed, we can sign a non-disclosure agreement (NDA) to access the data solely for verification purposes.        
-   **Virtual verification**
    -   The author runs the full package in a prepared environment in their computer (e.g., via screen sharing or secure remote session).
    -   The reviewer observes the process and receives the resulting outputs for comparison.
-   **Synthetic data approach**
    -   Authors share synthetic datasets that mimic the structure of the real data.
    -   The reviewer verifies reproducibility using the actual data, while the public package includes only the synthetic version.
    
These approaches help ensure transparency and reproducibility without compromising data confidentiality.

### How do I document the datasets used in the reproducibility package?

All datasets used in the package must be documented in the **Data Availability Statement**. This should include the following information based on the source of the data:

#### 🔹 If using data generated by others:

> - Provide a full data citation or DOI, or include:

Reviewer 2: link to the social science data editors guidance on creating a data citation. emphasize that data citations are expected.

  - **Filename(s)**: Exact file name(s) from the source
  - **Source**: Name of the data provider or institution
  - **URL**: Direct download link, if available
  - **Access Date**: Month and year when the data was downloaded
- If known, include:
  - **License**: Who can access the data? Can it be redistributed?
- If using a subset of the data (e.g., via point-and-click download):
  - Specify details like time period, units, or variable names extracted (e.g., from WDI)
- If using data manually constructed or collected programmatically (i.e.: using web scraping) from a source on the internet or a report:
  - Specify the instructions on how the data was collected and where it comes from
  - Include all other information mentioned above

#### 🔹 If using data generated by your team:

> - Document the data in one of the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Publish the data in one of the following approved data catalogues:
```

  - [Microdata Library (MDL)](https://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/home)

>   - [Development Data Hub (DDH)](https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/int/home)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - [Development Data Hub (DDH)](https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/int/home) for geospatial, administrative, time series, and other data
```

To set this up, follow the environment setup guides for each language:
-   **Python Environment Setup:**  [Python Instructions](https://worldbank.github.io/wb-reproducible-research-repository/resources/environment-instructions/python.html)
-   **R Environment Setup:**  [R Instructions](https://worldbank.github.io/wb-reproducible-research-repository/resources/environment-instructions/R.html)
-   **Stata Environment Setup:**  [Stata Instructions](https://worldbank.github.io/wb-reproducible-research-repository/resources/environment-instructions/stata.html)

Using a clean, well-defined environment is critical to computational reproducibility.

### Do you check if the code is correct?
No. We only verify complete documentation and **computational reproducibility**: whether running the same code and data produces the same outputs.  We do not assess whether the code correctly implements the intended methods, nor the quality of the code.

## Documentation-Related Questions

### What is a README and what should it include?

> A  **README**  is the main guide to your reproducibility package. It helps others—including reviewers, editors, and future researchers—understand how to navigate, run, and evaluate your code and data. A clear and complete README is essential for transparency and reproducibility. A recommended template is available [here](https://github.com/worldbank/wb-reproducible-research-repository/blob/main/resources/README_Template.md).

Reviewer 2: suggest adding that if the publication is a journal article they should use the social science data editors template. mention our template is a simplified version of that.
